Okay.
It was in 1970 when the Georgian monks from Lavra moved here and enlarged the monastery and built a new monastery and took their name.
One of them, the second abbot and the son of the first abbot, St.
Deftimius, is considered the most important scholar in the medieval in Georgia.
He has translated 55 works.
And also he has written some, in Greek, some texts.
When he came here, he continued his translations, which were started in Lavra.
And his disciples were copying them.
From that time, the library and the scriptorium started functioning here.
The first books came from Georgia.
ordered by one of the founders, General Tornikius, who was named Jonas Manc.
He went to Georgia in 178.
May I just ask a question?
Where was the scriptorium?
Is there any evidence of the scriptorium here?
So there is no evidence of it left.
So there was a Georgian scriptorium, but also a Greek scriptorium, because we know about a certain scribe named Theophanes.
Who wrote some... Here.
1004 and 1023.
In the middle of the 11th century, a school was founded by another abbot,
by St.
George III, who also translated a lot of books, liturgical books mostly, from Greek into Georgian.
Which books, Greek into Georgian?
Greek into Georgian, yes.
Greek and Georgian were Georgians.
Here, on Athens?
Yes, about 20 minutes walk from the monastery, in an old monastery, St.
John the theologian.
At first he brought 80 orphans from Georgia there,
And a lot of scholars came out from that school and a lot of translations were made.
There are some Georgian translations existing without their Greek prototype.
So it exists through the Georgian?
Yes.
Georgians say that if that school today
Ascetical and Philological School of Iberum.
If that school did not exist, the history of Georgia will be different.
What was the name of the school again?
Ascetical and Philological School of Iberum.
Ascetical and Philological School.
This is very important to me.
Ascetic, yes.
So this lasted till 1200.
Then there were some difficulties in Georgia.
So, the monks, the people who came from Georgia to be monks here, and there were some destructions in the monastery.
The monastery comes back to the good days after 1500.
At that time, we know from that time till 1900, we know a lot of Greek scribes working here.
There were not a lot, or there were?
There?
There were a lot or there were not a lot?
You said there were a lot of Greek scribes?
A lot, a lot.
There were?
There were.
Okay, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
So the monastery was a center of...
studies in that period between 1500 and 1900.
A lot of scholars came from the monastery, stayed some years, copied books.
Other scholars offered their collections to the monastery.
We can mention the two most important offerings to the monastery.
One was the collection of Maximus Margunius in 1600, who was the most important theologian of that time.
living in Italy in Venice and Padova, and offered nine cases of books for the monastery.
And the most of them are in Latin.
In 1678, Patriarch Dionysius IV offered his collection a lot of books.
We don't know exactly how many, but a lot.
Also, you see, there were some losses.
During the Renaissance, people sent by the... by some... Like you say, a princess from Italy.
They were sent to some representatives here to collect books.
A delegation, as I was saying.
Some scholars come in, sent by the princess from Italy.
Emissaries or something like that?
Yes, emissaries of the Pope, of the French kings.
And they took a lot of classical books.
Now, how did they take?
They stole?
Some of them they were stole, some of them they bought, some of them they were offered.
Also, the charge of Russia and Patrick's Russia wanted Greek originals in order to correct their translations.
One emissary of those of the Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich and the Patriarch Nikon.
Monk Arsenei Sukhanov took 158 manuscripts from our library.
498 from Mount Athos.
Who is this again?
Arsenei Sukhanov.
Okay.
In 1725, some emissaries from the Pope of Rome were offered with 15 manuscripts of patristic texts.
In the last years of last century, 19 Georgian books were disappeared and now they are in Tbilisi.
And in our century also some books were lost in the beginning of our century.
One of them in Baltimore, Walters Art Gallery.
Did Curzon take any of the books from here?
Robert Curzon, he's the English man who took books from the British Library?
No, no, no.
He wrote that the monks denied to give him any book here.
I'm going to write about him in here.
He came and he stole, as far as I'm concerned, and he gloated about it.
Terrible.
And now we have about 2,130 Greek manuscripts.
2,130 Greek.
Which is the sixth largest collection in the world.
Among them there are 479 manuscripts on Byzantine music.
The largest, officially, the largest collection in the world, really is the second largest, because there are some books, somewhere hidden.
In another collection?
In another collection, yes.
There is another collection that has more books on wizarding music, but not yet... Disclosed, as they say.
Yes, they are disclosed.
So officially is the largest.
Officially is the first place, at least.
Yes.
Better there than the British Museum, you know.
You know, some days before, two or three days before, a Georgian scholar came here, a member of the Academy of Sciences in Georgia, and he went to the British Museum and he was shown a polio of an old Georgian codex.
And he thought that he was the handwriting of St.
George, I mentioned.
To see the other codexes written by St.
George, we have nine... A St.
George here?
And yes, and he understood that it really was an autograph message that followed in a British museum that goes in a Greek codex.
So he says that perhaps this codex came from... How about printed books?
How many printed books do you have?
Let me say some more.
Yes, please.
And I had it... No, pardon.
95 Georgian manuscripts, which is considered the most important collection outside Georgia.
Half of them are dated in 10th and 11th centuries.
We also have some 70 manuscripts in Slavic languages, nine in Romanian, seven in Arabic, one in Coptic, and one in Italian.
We have the most important collection of printed books on Athos.
About 1,000 books published between 1480 and 1600.
About 10,000 books published between 1600 and 1900.
Many of them, a lot of them come from the collections of scholars, of important scholars, and in the margins they have their own written notes and so on.
Annotations and important, pardon?
Their annotations, I guess I call them, yes.
Marginalia.
So here there are some books of Byzantine music.
1825 by Chander in Agia Sophia in Constantinople.
A famous musician, a famous composer and monk of our monastery, Cosmas the Macedonian.
And here is the miniature of Saint John of Damascus.
This is written in the same period, not dated,
by another famous composer, Balasius the priest.
He's depicted here.
This is here.
This is in the same time, some years before the 1700s.
One of the three composers who introduced the new notation, the now-used notation of the Byzantine music, Hormuzas and Hortophilax.
Here it's a psalter written in 1346 in Constantinople by a famous scribe, the monk Hariton of the monastery of Odigon.
and belonged to the Empress Anna Palaiologina, the aunt of Savoy married to John IV Palaiologos.
So this must have come as a gift.
Yes.
Yes, perhaps by the patriarch.
It was written in gold.
On parchment.
On parchment, yes.
All on parchment, probably.
Not all.
Those are on paper.
That's paper, yeah.
It's on parchment, written in circa 1200.
And the pages are written in gross-like shape.
There are some small lines, some larger ones.
and then some other, some smaller.
And each one out of the four existed in the world, really like that.
And its cover is dated in circa 1600, it's gilded.
The book published in Moscow, in Slavonic, in 1688, the Gospel, with very large letters.
It was offered to the monastery by three
The four gospels, the four great feasts, Christmas, Epiphany, Easter, replaced with Greek text, with Greek manuscript text, written by hand.
And so the gospel was read from this book during those feasts.
Eccles were holding them at 124.
27 kilos, I think.
It would need at least two.
During the Greek Revolution, in 1823, when the Turkish invaded Mount Athos, they kept as prisoners the 80 monks, the most important monks of Mount Athos, in the Salonican White Tower, and demanded a lot of money as ransom.
The monastries didn't have some money.
Some of the monastries gave some of the precious things in order to take them.
Even to a Turkish official,
in Kortse in Albania for 2860 kyrus.
In the first page there is a petition of the monks to the inhabitants of Kortse to find the money and give them to the Iglesia.
So the... best illuminated Byzantine Gospels
with 37 miniatures, written in the middle of the 13th century.
All of the miniatures, the miniatures of the Fire Evangelists, are the prototypes of a whole group of manuscripts, Byzantine-illuminating manuscripts, out of the group, if you're on five, this is number five of our library.
Written by St.
Theophilus Demir Streamer, the most well-known, the most important scribe living in our monastery.
He lived here between 1511 and 1523, for 12 years, and wrote 30 manuscripts.
This is written for his own use.
It contains the Gospels, the four Gospels, the Psalter, and some services, hymns, and prayers.
And in the last pages, it contains his will.
I'm sorry, this one here.
1715-18.
Right, there's the name under there.
809.
Codex 809.
Most important, does it have it here?
By Saint Theophilus.
Theophilus, yes.
I'm just taking notes and listening.
And this is written circa 1620.
by another famous scribe, Matthew Metropolitan of Myra, who perhaps spent some years in our monastery, and it contains the Akafist hymn.
There is a salutations to the mother of God.
You see, it's... It's 1626.
It's 1626.
It's the Codex.
I'm writing that down too, so I can identify it later if I have to.
with the initial letters.
That's beautiful.
That's magnificent.
That's some of the best calligraphy I've seen.
Yes, it's one of the most famous.
That was done here as well.
Yes, yes.
So did this attract some of the, this monastery attract some of the greatest?
As I told you, yes.
Some of them were coming here, spending some years here, studying, copying the manuscripts, and then went away.
a letter of 1585 to another one.
He says that Abbott here is very good to scholars.
He does not put them to do heavy works and so on.
Allows them to.
Yes.
Also, another loss I didn't mention is with Athonia School.
Athonia School was founded in 1754 by Evgenius Bulgaris, a famous scholar of his time.
And his successor, it was familiar to the librarian here, and so the librarian sent him a lot of books.
When the school stopped its functioning, the books didn't came back.
And here is another manuscript of 13th century, another gospel of 13th century.
Its parchment is very thin.
They say that perhaps it was made from the litter of fetus of animals, or embryos of animals, or newborn animals.
647 folios.
That's extraordinary.
Yes.
And when you close it, it's like that, like it was from paper.
I've never seen that in parchment before.
Here there are three Georgian manuscripts.
This is one of the first manuscripts of our library, the second volume of the Old Testament.
This is 10th century.
10th century, written in the monastery of Otski, in 978, ordered by one of the founders, General Tornikius, who was named John, who was named John with some other manuscripts, formed our library, our first collection.
It's the oldest book of our library, in our library.
It's a gospel written in a Georgian monastery, Opiza, in 913.
It's the second oldest Georgian dated manuscripts in the world.
This here.
They have a photograph of them, and show the study of them in Georgian, I see.
This is an autograph by Saint Ephthymius, the second half of the monastery, and takes some of his translations into Georgian, written by his hand in 190.
Agree, I agree.
I'm still on this one here.
But what accounts for the simpatico between the Georgians and this particular monastery?
How is it that you became very close with the Georgians?
I told you that in 1980 they came here and they took the monastery and they bought the monastery and some other small monasteries nearby.
They enlarged it.
And they had the administration of the monastery till 1356.
In 1956, the administration came to the hands of the Greek monks.
There were always Greek monks, but for four centuries, they were less than George.
Is it safe to say that during the period of the Soviet Union that you had more information here on Georgia than there was probably available in Georgia?
Ah, no, no.
In the period of the Soviet Union, our abbot was the abbot of Stavronikita.
We went to Georgia with a delegation.
I'm minister of Georgia.
of Georgia told them that if Eviron Monastery did not exist, the history of Georgia would be different.
That's quite an extraordinary statement.
This is the current Prime Minister who said that?
No, no, in 1986.
1986, alright.
I don't know who was this.
Art in Cunaboulos.
Published in Florence in 14.
It's the first edition of Homer's Iliad.
Isio Princeps, that's the first.
Florence, 1488.
And would you say this was acquired when it was published?
Has this been here since the 15th century, do you think?
I think that those who were in the collection of Maximus Marvunius, who sent us pages of books in 1600.
He sent you some magnificent books.
Who was Maximus Marvunius?
He was the most important theologian of his time.
He was a bishop of Kythira.
But because the Kythyra were under Venetian mode of Kythyra, so he spent his time, his life in Italy.
These are some of the most beautiful books I've ever seen.
Look at how well they've preserved themselves after 500 years.
There's no discoloration.
There's no foxing to speak of.
Amazing.
And this is an etymological, a lexicon, a famous lexicon, published in Venice in 1499 by Zacharias Kalijas to publish it, to print it, yes.
It's exquisite.
And it's considered one of the best examples of the Hippocrates.
Well, most of the books, well, many of the books that Maximus gave you were printed books.
Yes, yes.
This is Venice, not Florence up there.
And there are three liturgical manuscripts, books containing the three holy liturgies, written in the monastery in the 17th century, in 1621.
And this is the initial letters, O, E. Worth-taking, really.
How many incunabula did you say you have, do you think?
Thirty-four.
Oh, boy.
This is a treasure house.
Here there are two scrolls, one parchment.
Written circa 1200, it contains the service of the Holy Communion.
1591, by Luke the Cypriot, Bishop of Bouzeau.
Bouzeau.
Bou
Turkish soldiers invaded Peloponnes with Ibrahim from Egypt.
The precious things were sold in order to buy weapons.
And there is a list of our, of the precious things from Thessaloniki.
Three from Thessaloniki, one from Yann and two from others.
Here, you see, most of those books are coming from Maximus Margonius.
The books have always been very precious here, haven't they?
Yes.
The library moved here in 1967.
They were about 30 years old.
I've never seen these slats before.
They're very interesting.
Excellent.
Once more, please.
What is it?
Medicine for soul.
Is that from the entrance to the Ramesses tomb?
Yes.
Yes, that's famous.
I think it was Diodorus of Sicily who wrote when he was going to see this tomb.
It says, medicine for the soul, balm for the soul.
I went there.
It's at St.
Gau.
It's right outside the door.
I visited the St.
Gau last year at this time.